---
title: Constructing A Starship
---
# Constructing A Starship 

When creating a starship, players should proceed along the following steps:

-   The first step is to select a hull, taking into account the total number of Ship Points available to them.
-   Once the players have their hull, they roll on the Complications charts, gaining one Past Histories Complication and one Machine Spirit Quirks Complication. Alternatively, the GM can select these Complications instead.
-   Once the Complication has been determined, the players build their ship. Based on their hull and the drive they select, they will have a certain amount of Space and Power.
-   Next, players must select what type of crew their vessel has. All ships start with a Competent Crew with a Skill Level of 30. The cost of the crew is included with the cost of the ship's hull. If players wish to, they can gain an additional 5 Ship Points to spend on their vessel by downgrading their Crew to Incompetent (20). Likewise, they can upgrade their crew to a Crack Crew (40) by spending 5 of their existing Ship Points. They may even upgrade their crew to a Veteran Crew (50) by spending 15 Ship Points.
-   Next, the players must select one Essential Component from each of the Essential Component categories.
-   Next, players may select Supplemental Components. Each Component (Essential or Supplemental) has a Space and Power requirement. The sum total of all the Component's requirements may not exceed the Space provided by the hull, or power generated by the drive.
-   Once the starship's Components have been recorded, any benefits and drawbacks should be totalled and, if necessary, combined.

Note that certain Components can increase a ship's Crew Population or Morale level above 100%. This is acceptable, and should set the ship's new maximum level of Crew Population and Morale. If damaged, a starship's Crew Population and Morale can be restored back up to these maximums, but not above them. This may seem strange, since both Crew Population and Morale are abstract representations, rather than a concrete measurement of crewmembers or their loyalty. However, just consider these Components to be increasing the loyalty of the crew, or the amount of warm bodies aboard the ship, and subsequently making either value slightly more resilient to losses.

# Hulls 

A ship's hull determines much about a ship. Primarily, the hull dictates how much space is available for the ship's components, but hulls also place limits on speed, manoeuvrability, ship integrity, and even amour. Although ship hulls are almost always different in size or shape, they can be organised into several general types: transport, raider, frigate, light cruiser, cruiser, grand cruiser and battlecruiser.

## Transports

Transports are easily the most common starships found in the Imperium. Tasked with the often thankless job of hauling goods from one end of the galaxy to the other, transports are large, slow, and designed to carry as much cargo as possible within their hulls. Nevertheless, these vessels are almost single-handedly responsible for maintaining the integrity of humanity's domain. Hive worlds, for example, would not long survive without regular shipments of food and water from agri-worlds, and for many far-flung colonies, the regular passage of a chartist captain or tramp freighter is their only communication with the larger Imperium. Transports sacrifice speed, manoeuvrability, and armour in exchange for cargo space, and while they often have some weapons, they are no match for a true combatant. Thus, transports are often prime targets for pirates. A Rogue Trader with a transport will have to rely on her wits to get her out of sticky situations, rather than her guns. However, if she chooses to focus on mercantile pursuits to make her fortune, she will find no better vessel to aid her.

## Raiders

Raiders are a broad class of hulls covering everything from privateers to the destroyers used in the Imperial Navy. Typically, a "raider" denotes a vessel designed for speed and combat. This makes them popular with the many pirates and buccaneers who raid the space-lanes, preferring to strike lone vessels swiftly, then flee before they should be noticed by a Navy patrol. The Imperial Navy also makes use of raiders (referred to as destroyers), though they prefer to outfit them with heavy ship-crippling munitions such as torpedoes and send them out to hunt larger vessels. Destroyers' superior speed and manoeuvrability means they can close the range, launch, and escape before the target can fire on them---most of the time. Raiders are some of the fastest ships in the Calixis Sector and Koronus Expanse. Their speed and manoeuvrability is unmatched by other classes, and their firepower is often as good as other vessels of comparable tonnage. To achieve this, however, raiders sacrifice armour and other defences, along with cargo and stowage space. In essence, they are glass cannons, able to throw out heavy fire, but unable to take it in turn. Instead, they rely on evasive manoeuvring and high speed to stay out of the reach of the guns from heavier craft. Heavy raiders are a subset of raiders with larger hulls packed with more weapons. They also have more powerful engines, allowing a heavy raider to carry better armour. They may not be as nimble as their smaller cousins, but, given a straight run, most captains find a heavy raider's 'legs' are just as long. A Rogue Trader must have a talented tactical mind - and a skilled pilot and crew - in order to make the most of a raider. The ships are designed for piracy, devious deeds, and little else. But if that is what a Rogue Trader sets her mind to, she'll find no vessel suits her needs better.

## Frigate

In many ways, frigates are the pinnacle of the shipbuilder's art. Lean, fast, and dangerous, frigates can outrun anything they can't fight, and destroy anything they can catch. Frigates fill the ranks of Battlefleet Calixis, where they are prized commands for the youngest and most aggressive naval captains. While a frigate may not seem as prestigious as a cruiser or battleship, their versatility means they are the Navy's ship of choice for all manner of actions. Frigates are tasked for convoy escorts, patrols, anti-piracy operations, and even attacks on rebel ships and stations. They routinely skirmish with the frigates and raiders of seditionists, pirates, and even hostile xenos races. Thus, a frigate captain is 'in the mix' much more often than her counterparts aboard the Battlefleet's larger vessels. Frigates are a balance between all aspects of ship design; speed, manoeuvrability, firepower, and defences. A skilled Mechanicus shipwright can even increase their cargo capacity and supply stowage without greatly reducing any other aspects. They are also relatively common ships, often with robust, simple designs. Therefore they are easily modified and maintained. There are countless stories in the Calixis Sector of crippled frigates lost in space, only to limp into port months later after their crews had affected emergency repairs. All this means frigates are some of the most desired ships for enterprising Rogue Traders. A frigate provides a Rogue Trader with almost unlimited options. Trade, exploration, conquest, piracy, all are possible with a properly outfitted frigate and a captain of pluck and nerve at the helm.

## Light Cruiser

Light cruisers are the eyes and ears of the Battlefleet. Smaller and faster than true cruisers, light cruisers have the massive fuel and supply reserves for deep void patrols. These may last for years, even decades, and thus light cruiser commanders must be independent-minded and self-reliant. Light cruisers are also used as the flagships of small squadrons of frigates and destroyers tasked with escorting convoys or hunting pirates. A light cruiser's design is usually balanced between combat and endurance. They have the advantage of being only slightly slower and less manoeuvrable than a frigate, while mounting a capital ship's armament. This is accomplished, however, by giving the light cruiser substantially less armour and reinforced interior bulkheads than a proper cruiser. In short, light cruisers are faster and more manoeuvrable than standard cruisers, but much more fragile. For a wealthy Rogue Trader, a light cruiser may seem attractive. However, there are several hurdles she will have to overcome. Capital warships are substantially rarer in the Calixis Sector than frigates, raiders, or transports, and are usually only found in the Imperial Battlefleet. Even if a rogue trader is able to procure one, the advanced technologies and arcane knowledge required to maintain such vessels is rare, often only found in naval yards and forge worlds. Finally, light cruisers are built as warships, and converting them to other uses can be difficult. If a Rogue Trader has the resources to overcome these issues, however, she'll find herself at the helm of a ship perfect for exploration or war, with few equals in Imperial space.

## Cruiser

A cruiser is a warship through and through. These are the ships of the line of Battlefleet Calixis, the heavy-hitters that fight major naval engagements. These ships are rare---building one takes centuries if not longer, and requires knowledge and technology from mankind's golden age now only known to the most powerful tech-magos. However, each vessel---often five or more kilometres long---carries the firepower to burn planets. They are designed to win wars, and the Imperial Navy guards them zealously. Cruisers carry large banks of weapons and are heavily armoured. They have huge engines, but due to their size, their speed and manoeuvring is not spectacular. This is good for a cruiser's smaller opponents, since their only chance against these behemoths is to flee. Indeed, cruiser designers expect their craft will most often fight other cruisers, and will mount powerful weapons designed specifically to slay these ships. For a Rogue Trader, a cruiser is a vessel filled with both promise and peril. All the problems that come with a light cruiser are multiplied ten-fold here. Often these vessels cannot be bought for any amount of money, and may only be procured through some truly worthy deed (or equally villainous scheme). Even if a Rogue Trader manages to get her hands on a cruiser, she will find a universe of enemies scheming to take it from her. A cruiser is an invaluable treasure, after all. However, a Rogue Trader with the resources, cunning, and ruthlessness to get a cruiser and keep it, it is an unrivalled power beholden to no-one but herself.

## Battlecruiser

The battlecruiser concept arose as a result of the perceived failures of the older grand cruiser designs. These had been built around advanced experimental drive systems, which ultimately proved to be unacceptably prone to catastrophic malfunction during warp transit. As a result of these issues, grand cruisers came to be regarded by many as cursed ships. Furthermore, during the internecine conflict of the Age of Apostasy, several of the skills required to safely maintain the arcane technologies of the grand cruisers were lost, rendering them hazardous. Yet there was still a gap in the Imperial armoury for a heavy cruiser, a vessel which straddled the gap between a "classic" cruiser like the Lunar class and a full battleship. Numerous small task forces required a powerful flagship, yet the potent and precious battleships could not be spared for every such engagement. Using the simpler technologies of the latter Imperial cruisers, and the power systems of battleships, the master tech-masons of the Adeptus Mechanicus produced an elegant hybrid, the battlecruiser, during the latter 36th Millennium. Designed to provide the fleet with the long range punch of battleship weaponry in a cruiser-sized hull, battlecruisers are forged purely for heavy engagements between vast capital vessels, and excel in this narrow speciality. They overpower cruisers by virtue of their overcharged weaponry; very few ships can out-shoot a battlecruiser. Typically somewhat smaller and more lightly armoured than their predecessors, the grand cruisers, battlecruisers are nevertheless more economical, safer and more reliable. What they lack in heavy armour and exotic drive systems is more than made up for in raw firepower. Jealously guarded by battlefleet admirals, it is rare for these powerful ships to end up in the ragtag Rogue Trader fleets, but on occasion a particularly influential or devious individual will intrigue her way into the command of a battlecruiser.

## Grand Cruiser

Grand cruisers are vastly powerful and archaic warships, remnants of a more technologically advanced era of Imperial history. Only battleships carry heavier armour or wield more firepower. These vessels were once the core of battlefleet squadrons, tough warships designed for concerted broadside actions and punishing void-duels. Now few in number, they are in many ways relics of a bygone age. Very few grand cruisers have been constructed in recent millennia, the entire concept having fallen out of favour in many battlefleets. Their revolutionary and highly sophisticated warp and realspace engine designs are now poorly understood, leading to many well publicised disasters and warp calamities. Indeed, the fleets of the archenemy contain the reinvigorated hulks of many formerly proud Imperial grand cruisers lost in the warp due to the gradual dilution of the sacred knowledge needed to render these imposing ships safe. Regarded by many suspicious senior staff officers in the Imperial Navy as dangerous, temperamental, and constructed using dubious and possibly heretical technologies, the surviving grand cruisers of the 41st millennium are largely relegated to the reserve fleets. These are motley collections of outdated and mothballed antique warships, held cold and silent in orbit around munitorium depot worlds, ready for one last call to arms. Although incredibly costly, complex, unpredictable and massively demanding in terms of maintenance and manpower, grand cruisers have much to offer Rogue Traders. They are vastly powerful ships, with continent-shattering firepower and ironclad armour that enables them to sweep aside entire squadrons of lesser vessels. As such, these vast craft are surprisingly common among the wealthier rogue trader fleets, especially given the willingness of cunning battlefleet lord admirals to divest themselves of what they regard as expensive and hazardous anachronisms.

# Complications

## Machine Spirit Oddity

| Roll | Complication|
|---|---|
| **1** | A Nose for Trouble: Something about this ship quivers at the thought of battle, always probing the cosmos for a new victim. Add +5 to the ship's Detection, and reduce this ship's Armour by 1, due to its many battles. Occasionally, the crew may find themselves in fights they might have preferred to avoid.  |
| **2** | Blasphemous Tendencies: Some unidentifiable aspect of this vessel's spirit resonates sympathetically with the Immaterium. Captains find this ship swims through the warp more easily, as if it was more at home there... All Navigation Tests made to pilot this vessel through the warp gain a +15 bonus. However, while aboard the ship, all crew suffer –5 to Willpower based Tests.  |
| **3** | Martial Hubris: The ship has a glorious legacy of warfare and triumphant combats. It is always eager to fight, and unwilling to back down. The ship gains +5 to all Ballistic Skill Tests to fire its weapons, but suffers –15 on any Operate (Voidship) Tests made to escape combat.  |
| **4** | Rebellious: This vessel does not suffer authority willingly. At times is seems to take pleasure in interfering with the plans of its masters. During no more than one space combat per game session, the GM should randomly select one of the ship's Components that becomes unpowered until repaired. However, whenever the ship suffers a critical hit (for any reason) roll 1d10. On a 8 or higher, the critical effect is ignored.  |
| **5** | Stoic: The vessel behaves like a beast of burden, plodding but reliable. Due to its somewhat plodding behaviour, whenever the crew would gain Profit Factor from an Endeavour, reduce the amount gained by 1. However, whenever one of the ship's Component's becomes damaged or unpowered, roll 1d10. On a 7 or higher, the ship shrugs off the damage and it is ignored.  |
| **6** | Skittish: The ship fears battle, bucking against its masters when entering the fray. When in combat, reduce the ship's Speed by 1. However, when not in danger, it runs eagerly and fast. Reduce the travel time for any long distance (between stars) voyage by 1d5 weeks, to a minimum of 1.  |
| **7** | Wrothful: The ship's spirit constantly smoulders with anger. In battle, it explodes into a berserker fury, straining and exhausting its systems. During combat, the ship gains +1 Speed and + 7 Manoeuvrability. Out of combat, the ship suffers –1 Speed and –5 to Manoeuvrability and Detection.  |
| **8** | Resolute: There is little in the universe that can stagger this vessel. No matter the foe, it will advance slowly but surely to meet it. The ship suffers –1 Speed, but gains +3 Hull Points and grants a +10 bonus to all Repair Tests.  |
| **9** | Adventurous: The vessel is eager to seek new horizons, to turn its bow from civilisation and delve into the darkness of the unknown. When participating in an Endeavour the ship gains +10 Detection, when not participating in an Endeavour it suffers –10 Detection.  |
| **10** | Ancient and Wise: This ship is of a bygone age, having survived many millennia of voyages and adventures. It's hull has weakened over the centuries, but it anticipates the needs of its crew, and will move as one with a competent master. The ship suffers –4 Hull Integrity but gains a +10 bonus to any Manoeuvre Actions it performs (including out of combat and ramming). |

## Past History

| Roll | Complication|
|---|---|
| **1** | Reliquary of Mars: Somehow, this vessel has been outfitted with ancient archaeo-tech systems from mankind's forgotten past. When constructing this vessel, players must select 1 Archeotech Component of their choice. However, any Tech-Use Tests to repair the ship suffer a –20, due to the highly complex nature of the machinery. Additionally, the tech priests of Mars regard the vessel as holy, or at least having holy components. Some may petition to visit the vessel, others may want it for themselves.  |
| **2** | Haunted: Some nameless horror haunts this vessel's past, leaving voidsmen to whisper stories of ghosts wandering through the corridors and cabins. Reduce Morale permanently by 10. However, strange premonitions flicker on the auger arrays, granting a +6 to the ship's Detection. Additionally, all non-crewmembers suffer –5 to Command Tests involving boarding actions or hit and run actions against the haunted vessel. The presence of these spirits may cause many other issues, depending on their origins and how they came to haunt the vessel (something the GM should determine).  |
| **3** | Emissary of the Imperator: The vessel is a veritable monument to the power and grandeur of the God-Emperor's might. Awe-inspiring and terrible, it lacks subtlety. All Intimidate Tests made by characters from this vessel gain +15, while all other social Skill Tests suffer a –5. These bonuses and penalties only apply if the character is known to be from the vessel. In addition, few will be able to see beyond the symbolism of the vessel - xenos see a threat, faithful Imperial citizens see a symbol of civilisation (or possibly chastisement), and heretics and rebels see a hated foe. Their reactions will be coloured accordingly.  |
| **4** | Wolf in Sheep's Clothing: Beneath this vessel's unassuming exterior is a dangerous spacefaring predator. The captain selects three Components. When scanned or subjected to anything but a thorough internal inspection, these components will either not register on the scans, or appear to be a different Component of the same type. Thus, the ship might hide additional armour plating, or a small macrobattery may be much more powerful than it appears. However, the ship suffers –2 Power to maintain the systems creating the illusion. The ship may also have concealed smuggling compartments, unseen passageways, hidden cogitation-override programming, or other secrets.  |
| **5** | Turbulent Past: Over the years this ship has been used to perform deeds dastardly to some and heroic to others. The GM selects a social group (pirates, heretics, the Imperial Navy, the Inquisition, or inhabitants of an important locale like Footfall). All ship's crew suffer a –20 to social Skill Tests when interacting with that group. The GM then selects a second group naturally opposed to the first. All ship's crew gain +20 to social Skills when interacting with that group. The additional problems that could arise from being hated by a particular group of people are limitless.  |
| **6** | Death Cult: Amongst the low-decks indentured crew, strange perversions of the Imperial Creed have arisen, glorifying death to celebrate the Emperor. Reduce Crew Population permanently by 8. However, reduce all Morale loss from any source by 2, due to the crew's unwavering faith. Additionally, ship officers and members of the Ministorum will have to deal warily with the cult and its leaders. Death cults do produce skilled assassins...  |
| **7** | Wrested from a Space Hulk: The ship has been recovered from a space hulk - a mass of wrecked ships that drifts intermittently through the warp and realspace. The ship is very old (and thus of high quality), but those who know of its origins whisper that it is cursed. The ship gains +1 Armour, +1 Speed, and +3 Manoeuvrability. However, every time the crew suffers a Misfortune, the GM rolls twice and chooses the worse of the two. The curse can have many other effects as well, many ill, but a truly skilled Rogue Trader can turn any situation to profit...  |
| **8** | Temperamental Warp Engine: The ship suffers a flutter in its Warp Engines, an inconsistency that no amount of maintenance or supplication can eliminate. Whenever the ship travels through the immaterium, the GM should roll 1d10. On a 6 or lower, the journey takes an additional 1d5 weeks, on a 7 or higher, the travel time is reduced 1d5 weeks instead (potentially causing the ship to arrive before it left!). However, once in a great while, the ship will leave the warp to unexpectedly find itself someplace other than its intended destination. (This is at the GM's discretion, but should not happen on a regular basis.)  |
| **9** | Finances in Arrears: The ship was purchased with borrowed funds. The money could have come from a criminal organisation, influential noble, or even a member of the Inquisition—but no matter the source, the debt must be repaid. Whenever the crew attempts to complete an Endeavour's Objective, they must accumulate an additional 50 Achievement Points to accomplish the Objective. However, the ship's financier supports her investment by providing aid and information. All crew can count their financier as a reliable contact. Additionally, their creditor may require the crew to perform specific missions that they are in no position to refuse.  |
| **10** | Xenophilous: Through dealings with some xenos race, this vessel has been outfitted with examples of their blasphemous technology. When constructing this vessel, players must select 1 Xenotech Component of their choice. However, any Tech-Use Tests to repair the ship suffer a –30, due to the strange and blasphemous nature of the machinery. Should the character attempting the repairs have Forbidden Lore (Xenos), the penalty is only –10. Also, the forces of the Ordo Xenos have an interest in the vessel and who controls it. |


# Components

Ships are made up of various Components, all contained within the ship's hull. These Components are what makes a ship a ship---without them, it would only be an empty framework. There are two types of Components: Essential Components and Supplemental Components. Essential Components are what all ships need in order to operate. These include the bridge, plasma drives, warp drive, life support, and the like. Supplemental Components may be useful, but a ship can still operate without them. They include cargo bays, weapons, and passenger quarters.

Components use two finite resources on a ship, Space and Power. There is a limited amount of room within a ship's hull, and the ship's plasma drives only provide so much energy. A Component needs both in order to be used by the ship's crew.

If a Component does not have power, it is unpowered. Unpowered Components are lightless, powerless sections of a ship, where there is no gravity and no air. Those who wish to enter them must use void-suits. Needless to say, they do not provide any of their listed benefits or bonuses to the ship.

If a Component does not have space, it is exposed. Exposed Components are mounted outside the ship's hull. They can still have power and be used---a passenger pod could be suspended on the outside of the ship and still have light, heat, and air. However, the module does not receive any benefits from the ship's armour or structural integrity. During combat, they will absorb the first hit to make it through the ship's shields, and be destroyed. Any crew unfortunate enough to occupy the Component at the time will be killed. However, some Components will have the external trait. These Components have been designed to be mounted outside a starship's hull and are placed in protected alcoves or shielded by strange technologies. An external Component does not take up Space, and cannot be destroyed except by a Critical Hit.

## Essential Components

All ships have certain vital Components, without which they could not operate. These Components are included in a ship's basic design. They cannot be removed (lest the vessel turn into an expensive and useless hulk), but may be upgraded---replacing older and less useful Components with more powerful versions. These Essential Components are specifically for starships capable of warp-travel---a system defence monitor or inter-system tug, for example, would not require a warp drive or Geller Field.

A warp-capable starship's Essential Components are the following:

### Hull

The framework on which a starship is constructed, a hull, more than anything else, defines a starship. This is also one of the few Components that cannot be upgraded.

### Plasma Drives

Gigantic edifices of almost incomprehensible technology, plasma drives take up immense amounts of space within a starship's hull. Without one, a starship is little better than a cold, drifting tomb.

### Warp Drives

The vast majority of starships are consigned to toil through space at speeds much slower than light. They have the unenviable choice of remaining trapped within a single star system, or spending centuries travelling to even the closest suns. The warp drive provides a shortcut, allowing a vessel to enter the terrifying realm known as the immaterium. If a ship can survive here, it can reach destinations within weeks or months instead of years---essential for a Rogue Trader.

### Void Shields

Void shields create barriers of energy around a starship. The weaker versions on transports exist mainly to deflect celestial debris, while a military vessel's void shield is strong enough to absorb incoming fire.

### Geller Field

Though a void shield protects a starship in space, it is of no use against the nightmarish inhabitants of the warp. For that, a warp-capable ship requires a Geller Field. This technology has existed since long before the Age of Strife, and creates a bubble of normalcy in that realm of chaos, and makes sure its creatures stay outside the hull.

### Life-Sustainer

Without the pumps, bellows, and filters of the life-sustainer, the air of a starship would soon be toxic fog, and the water, undrinkable sludge. Life-sustainers purify the ship's atmosphere and recycle waste to produce clean water.

### Crew Compartments

Even the smallest transports require thousands of crewmembers to operate. Many are menial labourers press-ganged from the depths of hives, others are skilled void-men trained to operate a starship's many systems. Regardless, they all require a place to live, be it a mouldy bunk or well-appointed cabin.

### Bridge

Just like every body must have a head, every starship must have a bridge. Here, from her command-pulpit, the captain directs her vessel and the actions of her thousands of crew. Here also are the advanced cogitators that direct the ship's targeting systems, sensors, and other systems.

### Sensors

Sight is of little use when dealing with the vast distances of the void. Auspexes, grav-detectors, and auger arrays can spy the reflected light from a tumbling asteroid---or heat from an enemy vessel---thousands or even millions of kilometres away. More advanced sensors can even spot the warp-wake of a vessel traversing the Immaterium.

## Supplemental Components

Though they are not needed for a ship to exist, many Supplemental Components are vital for a starship's operations and even survival. There are many different types of Supplemental Components, aiding in everything from combat to cargo transport. Some of the more common types are weapons, passenger compartments, armour, plating, cargo holds, and the distinctive armoured prows of Imperial warships, made up of 30 metres of adamantium or more.

When installing Weapon Components, they must be placed in one of the starship's Weapon Capacity slots. For example, a starship that has a Weapon Capacity of Dorsal 1 and Prow 1 can have one dorsal weapon and one prow weapon, no more. Certain Weapon Components may only be installed in certain classes of ships, or in certain Weapon Capacity slots.

### Lances

If a lance weapon is installed on a vessel of frigate size or smaller (transports and raiders, for example), it must be installed in a prow weapon slot. Lances are large and cumbersome weapons and in respects to smaller vessels, can only be installed on ships specifically designed to carry them. If a ship of frigate size or smaller does not have a prow weapon slot, it cannot carry a lance.

### Landing Bays

When acquired, a Landing Bay comes equipped with one squadron per point of strength (these may be fighters, bombers, assault boats, Aeronautica, or shuttle craft). However, the GM may decide that the players have to Acquire the small craft separately, or, if she prefers to offer her group more versatility, she can have the landing bays come with two squadrons per point of Strength. The types of craft in these squadrons must be designated when the bay is acquired. Any replacement or additional small craft must be Acquired separately.

Generally, Imperial landing bays' structural designs require them to be included along the port or starboard flanks of a ship. Certain patterns may allow otherwise, but unless specified in the entry, a Landing Bay must be installed on a Port or Starboard Weapon Capacity Slot.

### Nova Cannons 

Very few weapons are capable of creating a blast effect that can encompass multiple warp-capable starships. These rare and massive bore weapons are distinguished by that capacity. Nova Cannons must be installed in a Prow Weapon Capacity Slot.

### Torpedo Tubes 

Torpedoes offer a vessel the opportunity to inflict tremendous damage at extreme range. They are particularly effective in enabling a squadron of smaller ships to overcome much larger warp-capable vessels. Torpedo Tubes are required to store and launch torpedoes. Vessels armed with these are capable of firing torpedoes. Unless specified in the entry, a Torpedo Tube must be installed in a Prow or Keel Weapon Capacity Slot.

# Ship Points

When constructing a starship, the players are limited by one other factor — the amount of Ship Points available to them (See Profit Factor). Basically, the more Ship Points a charter provides, the bigger and better equipped a player's ship can be. When first constructing their ship before beginning a game, players can only build as powerful a ship as their total Ship Points allow. Hulls and certain Components have a Ship Point value listed, and once the players have completed their vessel, the combined ship point total cannot exceed their Ship Point total.

Essential Components are for the most part an exception to the ship point rule, and can be taken freely. Since each ship needs them, their cost has already been included in the hull cost. Certain specialised Essential Components do have ship point costs — to represent their value and rarity.

Any Ship Points left over after creating the starship are added to the group's starting Profit Factor. 

However, the Ship Point limit only applies at ship creation. Afterwards, players are only limited in which Components they can put in their ship by the ship's Space and Power, and their available Profit Factor.

# Acquiring a Starship 

In rare cases, the Explorers may even wish to acquire a whole starship rather than just starship components. To find the base Acquisition Modifier for a new vessel, the modifier is based on the size of its hull. A ship's Hull Modifier is equal to the hull's worth in Ship Points. Because starships are extremely rare and powerful, only one warp-capable vessel may be acquired at a time. In addition, no additional modifiers aside from those gained by a successful Commerce Test may assist with Acquisition Tests to acquire a starship - the fact that a Rogue Trader "is only buying one!" does not make things any easier. 

It is important to note that building a brand-new starship is an exacting task requiring many years (often decades) and much toil. Normally, building new starships is reserved to the Imperial Navy. Rogue Traders are far more likely to acquire a recomissioned Naval vessel or repair and refit a salvaged derelict.

### Example
Sarvus Trask is a Rogue Trader with a Profit Factor of 50. He wishes to acquire a new Havoc-class Raider to protect his interests. The Havoc-class costs 35 Ship Points, and thus Sarvus suffers a –35 modifier to his Acquisition Test.
