---
title: Squadrons
---
# Squadrons 

Starships of all species and factions operate in close formation for mutual benefit. Particularly in the case of raiders and frigates, squadrons of lightly-armed craft can often overwhelm larger, more powerful vessels together when they may not be able to do so alone. In larger battles, even cruisers will form into line squadrons, combining their considerable firepower into a single, devastating force. A group of two or more vessels may be formed into a squadron, at which point they will fight as a single entity. This requires a number of changes to the way the vessels act. Below are a series of rules and guidelines for grouping vessels into squadrons.

## Squadron Composition 

Squadrons are composed of two or more vessels of similar size. Under normal circumstances, only vessels of the same hull type can be grouped into a squadron. In some cases, however, it may be desirable to group frigates and raiders into the same squadron, or to group cruisers and battlecruisers or grand cruisers. In broad terms, the different tendencies towards speed, structure and armament of a given hull type may make combining different hull types difficult in practice, particularly when the hulls are very different. Beyond that, the way that squadrons carry out actions means that wildly different armament can cause problems as well - a squadron with only one torpedo-armed vessel will not fully benefit from spending actions to reload those torpedoes, as the action is wasted for every vessel but the torpedo-armed one. Typically, squadrons may be compiled of transports, raiders and frigates, light cruisers, cruisers, and battlecruisers, or grand cruisers. However, at the GM's discretion, different hull types can be mixed in squadrons.

## Squadron Formation 

Regular communication is required between vessels in a squadron, using vox and astrotelepathy to ensure that every vessel knows what it's meant to be doing at any given moment. The squadron's commander must give orders to every vessel under her command, and long distances hinder the necessary swiftness of communication. Every vessel in the squadron must remain within 3VU of at least one other vessel in the squadron. The entire squadron must form a single unbroken "chain," with no gap between vessels of greater than 3 VU. If, for any reason, the squadron formation is broken, the squadron's next Manoeuvre Action must involve bringing the squadron back into formation-if it wants to remain operational as a squadron. Squadrons cannot operate without a continuous, short line of communication, and are under standing orders to attempt to regroup when those lines are broken.

## Squadron Crew And Orders 

Squadrons move and fight as a single entity, moving in formation and firing at the same targets. A squadron has a single Crew Rating, which applies to every ship within the squadron. If multiple ships have different Crew Ratings, use the Crew Rating of the lowest ship in the squadron. At the start of the combat, roll 1d10 and add the highest Detection Bonus (the tens digit of the Detection characteristic) of the ships in the squadron. This is the squadron's Initiative. During each Strategic Round, each squadron must perform one Manoeuvre Action, and may perform one Shooting Action, and it may perform a number of Extended Actions as deemed appropriate by the GM. The Manoeuvre performed by the squadron must be the same for every ship-they must all move the same distance and turn in the same direction. Should, at any point, a test be called for to successfully perform a Manoeuvre Action, then a single test is made, based on the squadron's Crew Rating, and the lowest Manoeuvrability of the ships in the squadron. Resolving a squadron's Shooting Action is dealt with separately below. Extended Actions are likewise performed by the squadron as a whole, using a single test to resolve the success or failure of the action.

## Shooting At Squadrons 

Shooting at squadrons must be resolved in a slightly different way than firing at individual vessels. When firing at a squadron, the primary target will always be the vessel in the squadron that is closest to the firing ship. When firing a weapon, the first hit scored must be against the primary target. Any additional hits scored may be allocated against any other vessel in the squadron, so long as at least half of the total hits scored by that Weapon Component are allocated to the primary target. With hits scored from macrobatteries, the damage rolls are added together as usual after being allocated to a target vessel, with all the hits allocated to a single vessel being totaled. With hits scored from lances, the damage rolls are resolved individually as normal. Due to the way torpedoes, attack craft, and nova cannons attack-relying on actual physical location-all torpedoes, attack craft and nova cannons will attack whichever vessel they pass within range of, regardless of whether or not they are part of a squadron. Ships suffer damage and critical hits individually, but damage to Crew Population and Morale are resolved collectively for the entire squadron.

## Squadron Shooting: Massed Fire 

Squadrons fire in a different manner than lone ships, representing their ability to fill space with shots. This ability is called Massed Fire. When a squadron performs Massed Fire, select any number of either macrobatteries or lances; the two may not be combined for this purpose. Then select a single one of those Components. Roll to hit with that Component as normal. Every additional Component after the first grants an additional +10 to hit and +1 to the Strength of the Component for that shot only (effectively increasing the number of maximum shots by one). The damage, range and Crit Rating are all determined by the Component for which the attack roll is being made- however, all Weapon Components being used must be in range of the target. In addition, as only a single attack roll is being made only one Critical Hit can be scored. Squadrons can combine macrobatteries or lances into multiple groups for purposes of Massed Fire-for example, a squadron with eight macrobatteries could fire make one Massed Fire with all eight weapons, two with four each, or any other combination. This is intended to speed up combat involving squadrons of NPC starships, as well as give smaller ships an ability to work together to take out larger vessels.
