---
title: Social Encounters
---
# Social Encounters 

Conflict is key in any drama. It is the same for roleplaying games. Without adversity, PCs would rampage through any plot the Game Master came up with, making for a sterile and unpleasant experience. Many view conflict as combat--the physical act of fighting and shooting--and in most cases this is true. Conflict, however, can be far more than physical combat. Every interaction, whether it is between the PCs in the Compact or the many NPCs they encounter, is a potential conflict. In this scenario words, body language, and status are the weapons and can be as devastating as a shell from a bolter. Those dedicated to personality and social skills excel in these situations, where the goal is not to slay the foe, but to seduce, persuade, deceive, or manipulate the target into performing an even greater deed--whether knowingly or not. What follows are a set of rules bringing these situations to the fore and allowing those PCs with a flair and skill set for grandstanding to shine. While in theory a PC can complete a Social Conflict as a series of mechanical dice-based tests, the following encourages players to bring their wit, fast talking, and debating skills to the table. This can create a rewarding experience, easily as fulfilling as ripping the head from your foe. This section describes Social Conflicts, and also explains how PCs can use the system for far more than just one-on-one conflicts. Great orators have swayed whole nations to go to war in the past; an accomplished PC of could have the ability to persuade crowds to rebel, topple governments, and turn entire populations, all without even swinging a chainsword in anger. Once a character can do any of this, then she is truly on the path to becoming a PC who is feared or revered throughout the Sector.

## What Is a Social Conflict? 

A Social Conflict is a situation where two or more protagonists become locked in a verbal encounter in which there are consequences for whoever triumphs as well as the participant who loses. It can take many forms, from an organised debate to an impromptu argument, a discussion at a banquet table with veiled threats and subtle insults being passed around along with the condiments, a ritualistic sparring session where invectives are traded instead of physical blows, a conclave where two proponents wish to run a forthcoming operation in very different ways, a court of peers judging a defendant to decide her guilt, a jovial contest to find the lewdest member of the group, bartering for services against a rival equally desperate, manipulating a planetary official by leveraging her pride into signing a contract, or even a character calling out the Arch-Heretic in front of her followers to make a play for power. All these examples and much more besides could be classed as a Social Conflict and benefit from the following rules. In a physical combat, it is relatively easy to decide who the victors and losers are; normally within the brutal exchanges of Black Crusade it is the party still standing. However, things are not so clean cut in a Social Conflict. The loser may not acquire physical injury--although this is possible in certain situations--but there are inevitable repercussions, certainly a loss of standing and stature amongst the loser's peers and superiors, but there is also the mental state to take into consideration. The loser will be temporarily confounded, her beliefs may be shaken, the encounter may well have placed her in certain jeopardy, or she might be left reeling from the verbal assault. In any case, her mental defences will be momentarily weakened, her resolution drained and so will be suggestible and easier to manipulate than normal. As well as the personal price for losing a Social Conflict, there are also the contextual consequences the Game Master needs to take into account. This could be no more than a loss of face, but if the PC is bargaining for her life, or petitioning a powerful and hostile Lord for aid, then the aftermath will be far more dramatic. In this way, a Social Conflict acts as a trigger for unlocking even greater tension and peril within the game. Game Masters should use it as a tool in that regard, playing through the system is an exciting and fulfilling experience, but the outcome can be equally spectacular if the stakes are high enough.

### Entering into a Social Conflict 

Before detailing how a Social Conflict works, the Game Master must decide when the game shifts into a Social Conflict. This is entirely at the GM's discretion; there are no hard and fast rules and, just like physical combat, in most cases it is obvious when the game is ripe for Social Conflict. If there is doubt, the Game Master should ask himself the following few questions:

-   Is the conflict likely to be a sustained encounter?
-   Are there spectators present?
-   Will the outcome place the Heretics in peril or gain them a boon?
-   Is the encounter a pivotal moment within the adventure?

If the answer is yes to any of the above, then a Social Conflict is more than justified.

## Social Conflict Rules 

The following sequence describes how a Social Conflict works in Black Crusade. To start with, it details the most basic and likely scenario--that of a single player character engaging in a Social Conflict with a formidable NPC. There are also expanded rules to incorporate much larger conflicts, with paired or entire Compact based attacks against rival groups or gaining the will of large crowds. In a social confrontation, the participants' Willpower, Fellowship, Influence, and occasionally, Perception characteristics are used. The base system is as follows:

-   **Willpower** determines how many "rounds" a confrontation lasts. In an abstract way, it reflects a participant's health. Every time a player or NPC loses a round her Willpower is diminished. Once all Willpower is lost, then the participant is effectively beaten. She may not be physically harmed, but her resolve to continue the confrontation has gone, and she becomes very suggestible.

-   **Fellowship** is a measure of how well the participant is at verbal sparring, debating, or in winning over an aggressive audience. A Character who sits back and relies on mechanical dice rolling to do the talking is at a considerable disadvantage. Characters with quick minds, who are able to improvise with cutting rejoinders and their own dazzling wit, can overcome a foe who relies solely on her superior Fellowship Characteristic.

-   **Influence** carries much figurative weight in a Social Conflict. Bystanders are much more likely to listen to a participant with a higher Influence, as she is more imposing with a greater reputation. An opponent with less Influence can be easier to intimidate and cowed in front of her peers. In a Social Conflict, Influence is a resource that a player can use strategically to ensure victory over her adversary. In some instances, a participant (normally an NPC) will not have any Influence. In these situations the GM should temporarily assign Influence to the participant on the basis of the forthcoming encounter.

-   **Perception** is used during the conflict at the Game Master's discretion to note how the opponent is fairing in the ongoing verbal and mental exchange. The more Willpower an adversary loses, the more the physical effects show and this, in turn, can be used to further the advantage. For example, a Successful Perception test allows the player to note that her opponent is sweating profusely on her forehead, or that her left cheek has involuntarily started to tick as she fails to deal with another acerbic remark.

The Characteristics outlined are utilised in the following way during a Social Conflict. Note that the sequence assumes two participants, a Character vs. an NPC (a Player vs. the Game Master). Their are rules for expanding this later in the chapter.

1.  **Note Values:** Once the GM has designated the participants are in a Social Conflict, the player and GM note down their character's respective current Willpower and Influence values.

2.  **Bid Influence:** In a Social Conflict, the participants' Influence level temporarily acts as a bidding reserve. The more Influence is bid, the more devastating a metaphorical blow one could do to the opponent. However, if your foe comes out on top, a Character may have bet her reputation badly. Both participants secretly bid an amount of Influence. This is effectively "spent" and is taken from their Influence reserve for the duration of the confrontation.

3.  **Verbal Contact:** The players (or GM) now have a chance to directly influence the scene. The participant with the highest Fellowship has the choice of going first or second (in following rounds, the victor of the previous Fellowship test gets the choice). The participant then gets a chance to say something regarding the issue at hand, or, most likely, a withering put down or insult about her opponent. The second participant will get to respond in a similar fashion. The length and subjects of these diatribes depends entirely on the context of the scene. However, a good rule of thumb is to keep each participant's contribution to the equivalent of a short paragraph (about 5-10 seconds of actual speech), as this keeps the combat short and snappy.

4.  **Determine the Victor:** The Game Master will now decide who has performed the best. She is judging not just on inherent wit, but how in-character each contribution was (note that in many cases, the GM is judging her own input. Of course, most Game Masters are beyond reproach but there are alternative methods to judging the best contributions--see Best in Round). The winner receives a +20 modifier to the following test.

5.  **Fellowship Test:** The participants must then take an Opposed Fellowship test. If both participants fail, then this round has ended in stalemate. Either all parties feel they have (rightly or wrongly) gained the upper hand, or the spectators have failed to come to a consensus on who was winning in that round. Any bid Influence is lost and play repeats from Stage 2. In this instance of an Opposed Test, if the number of Degrees of Successes is tied, then the participant with the highest bid Influence wins instead of the usual situation where a party with the highest Characteristic bonus wins.

6.  **Lose Willpower:** Assuming there is a victor, then the losing participant removes 1d5 Willpower from her total. Any Influence the victor bid is then revealed (if it has not already come into play) and this is added to the lost Willpower total. Influence that the loser bid is lost.

7.  **Physical Manifestation:** If the losing participant takes more than 10 Willpower in a single round, then some physical manifestation of that mental blow shows (sweat, ticks, squirming, stuttering, etc). If the GM thinks it appropriate, a Successful Perception test allows the rival to spot the participant's discomfort. In the following round, if this information is deftly used by the winning participant in the Verbal Contact stage, then she gains a +30 modifier instead of the +20 bonus should she win the phase.

8.  **Victory or Defeat:** The Social Conflict continues using stages 2 through 7 until one party loses all of her Willpower. The remaining participant is considered the winner. The triumphant Heretic immediately regains all lost Characteristic values, bringing her back to normal levels. The losing party recuperates half her Infamy and Willpower as well. The rest returns at a rate the GM decides. A nominal rate is five points per hour, but this is at the GM's discretion and can be exploited for full narrative effect; for example, the loser now has a much weaker Willpower for the next few hours and so is easier to manipulate or far more suggestible.

### Social Opposition 

In a Social Conflict, the default test is an Opposed Characteristic Test using Fellowship. This is because Fellowship represents, in the broadest sense, how a Heretic interacts with others. However, some characters may be more specialised in this arena and are better at intimidating, deceiving, charming, or coaxing an opponent. To represent this, the Game Master can allow a character to use an Interaction Skill-based test instead of the nominal Fellowship Characteristic. The actual skill used depends on how the player performed in the previous Verbal Contact phase; if she was charming and eloquent, then she could use the Charm Skill for example, assuming she has it. Alternatively, if she barked orders, expecting them to be obeyed with nary a glance at her opponent, then the Command Skill could be more suitable, or even the Intimidate Skill. In summary, how the player (or NPC) reacts and performs in the Verbal Contact phase determines which Skill she can use in the following Opposed Test. Additionally, any Talents or Traits associated with these Skills can also be used if relevant. Talents such as Air of Authority, Cold Hearted, Disturbing Voice, Lexographer, Mimic, and Pity the Weak all have an effect during a Social Conflict. Even Traits such as Fear or the Stuff of Nightmares can have an impact during the encounter should the GM allow.

### Overawe 

Influence is reputation. It is a powerful metaphorical force that cannot easily be ignored. If Abaddon the Despoiler, leader of the 13th Black Crusade and battle-brother to Horus himself, strode into a chamber flanked by her Chosen bodyguard, it is almost inconceivable that a lowly Heretic would call her out, or flat out insult her. That is the power of a high Influence score. Attacking such a being in a social context should feel intimidating, and an uphill struggle. Game Masters can replicate this type of situation at the start of a Social Conflict using Overawe. 

Under this rule, the character with the lower Influence score must immediately make a Willpower Test to enter into a Social Conflict with her opponent. The test is modified with a penalty equal to ten times the difference of the Influence Bonus between the two Characters. If the character passes the test, she has overcome the raw presence of her foe and can engage in the Social Conflict as normal. However, if the character fails the test, then her own Influence pool is immediately reduced by half and she must lose 1d5 Willpower, as if she'd lost the first round of the Social Conflict. All Characteristic losses are in context of the following Social Conflict and are not permanent. Should the character find himself in this position, then she may voluntarily withdraw from the social encounter before it begins. Her would-be opponent is simply too formidable for the character, and she rethinks verbal conflict before entering into something she would struggle to recover from, let alone triumph over.

### Best in Round 

Stage 4 of a Social Conflict is a very subjective part of the sequence. The GM needs to judge the contribution of both participants in the previous stage (Verbal Contact) and decide which was the best, rewarding the winner with a crucial bonus. Here the GMs decisions and actions are above reproach. However, in the majority of Social Conflicts the GM will be playing one of the participants. To some, it may seem odd or jarring that the GM is the final arbitrator of the best rejoinder, when she himself is a participant. Should the group feel another method is needed then below are some options:

-   **Blind Vote:** All non-participating players vote for one of the participants on a folded piece of paper, and the character with the most votes wins. Do not assume the PC simply vote for their fellow players, for good role players should reward the finest insults and wittiest retorts whoever makes them.
-   **Noise-gauge:** A more instantaneous and instinctual method is to have the non-participating players give their response as jeers, cheers, applause, or whatever natural reaction is the group consensus. The spectators must wait until the contribution is finished and then make their noise of appreciation or derision. The other participant then makes her contribution and players will respond once more. Whichever side got the greatest or loudest response is the winner and gains the bonus for the following Fellowship Test. This is a quicker and simpler method than the Blind Vote but also lacks a way for players to deliberately vote against their peer.
-   **A Third Party:** Another method relies on someone else, who isn't a player or the GM, and is happy to take an impartial stance and witness the entire Social Conflict in an unbiased fashion. In Stage 4 she chooses which participant gave the best contribution. This method can work at gaming clubs, conventions, or anywhere there are fellow gamers who are not necessarily playing in the campaign. A Social Conflict played out in this situation can actually gather quite a crowd as onlookers take in and enjoy the players' verbal sparring. Participants will need to have their wit well and truly sharpened. If there is a crowd, they can potentially act as a Noise-gauge as well. No matter which method used to judge the contributions, it is important to note that everyone should be having a good time. All insults, verbal attacks, and threats must be in character and in context of the game. This system is not about starting real arguments, but aiding in conquering the galaxy!

## Talents and Traits 

Just like other tests, some Skills, Talents, and Traits can affect Social Conflicts. Skills have already been mentioned, in that a character can use a Skill instead of her Fellowship for the Opposed Test if appropriate, and the player's performance in the Verbal Contact stage is commensurate to a Skill in her repertoire. However, Talents and some Traits can have variable possible effects in a Social Conflict. The list below presents the Talents that have a direct effect in a Social Conflict, and a summary of their effect. See the full talent description for more details.

-   **Air of Authority:** +10 when using Command
-   **Cold Hearted:** Opposed Charm tests incur +20
-   **Disturbing Voice:** +10 when using Intimidate
-   **Inspire Wrath:** +10 to allies' Infamy reserve
-   **Lexographer:** +20 when in a Social Conflict in a different language
-   **Master Orator:** d10 Willpower against multiple foes
-   **Mimic:** d10 Willpower loss
-   **Nerves of Steel:** +20 against Intimidate
-   **Peer:** +20 to Infamy reserve
-   **Pity the Weak:** Bonuses to Command and Intimidate
-   **Unremarkable:** +20 to Deceive; lose half Infamy Reserve

Traits usually represent an innate or physical aspect of a character, and the majority of Traits have a limited impact in a Social Conflict. However, some Traits undeniably influence a social encounter, especially if that Trait describes a character's unusual physical aspect or countenance. Bestial, Daemonic, Fear, From Beyond, Incorporeal, Multiple Arms, Size, Stuff of Nightmares, and Swarm are all Traits that could have an impact. This is not an exhaustive list though; if the GM thinks another Trait can affect a social encounter, then it should also qualify for the following rule. A character with such Traits can have a positive, neutral, or negative effect in the forthcoming encounter at the GM's discretion. This depends on the context; a Heretic who causes Fear is a boon when attempting to cow or intimidate an opponent, for example, but can be a hindrance when trying to charm or assuage a target. The GM should summarise if a character's Traits give the Heretic an overall positive, negative, or neutral contribution. A modifier is then awarded: +10 for a positive effect, -10 for a negative connotation, and +0 for neutral. This is used along with the other modifiers in the Opposed Fellowship or Skill tests. A character's Traits can affect a Social Conflict even if she is not the primary contributor. A character who is providing Assistance or part of a Compact, group, or crowd Social Conflict can have her Traits taken into account as described above.

## Groups vs. Groups 

A Social Conflict that is dealing with multiple participants on both sides is a distinct possibility. There are several ways for a Game Master to run this situation. Firstly, she can pair up opponents, and then run them as a series of Social Conflicts. It is rare to get an even match-up so one participant may have to deal with two or more opponents; this is covered in the Two or More vs. One sidebar on this page. The other method is to establish a Compound Social Conflict. In this situation, the encounter is divided into the two opposing groups. Both sides add their entire Willpower and Infamy together. This creates each groups' Infamy reserve and Willpower level. A Social Conflict then continues as described above using the collected Infamy and Willpower scores, with a few additional exceptions. At the start of every round, each group nominates a single speaker; it is this character who performs in the Verbal Contact stage. The group can choose a new speaker at the start of every round, or the same speaker can stay in the role. When making the Opposed Fellowship or Skill Test, a speaker can have Assistance as normal. The losing side must lose 1d10+10 Willpower in addition to the equal amount of Infamy the victorious side bid. On conclusion of the Social Conflict, each member of the losing side individually regains only half of her Willpower and Infamy back. The remainder returns at five points per half hour, a much faster rate than normal as the group has shared the burden of the loss and is more resilient than a single combatant. The winning group has their Characteristics immediately restored back to pervious levels as normal.

### Two or More vs. One 

There are situations where a single character may find himself entering into a Social Conflict against a larger group. First, it is important to define the active participants. A Social Conflict often takes place before an audience of vested spectators, such as minions and serfs, or gawkers. These are not active participants-- an audience does not get onstage with the actor. Assuming the scenario is truly an uneven one, with a lone character in a Social Conflict with a group containing two or more participants, then the following guidelines should be used. The larger group must nominate a speaker; unlike in a Compound Social Conflict, the speaker cannot change. In effect, the rest of the Social Conflict is between these two participants, and should be treated as such in regard to Willpower, Infamy reserves, etc. However, the speaker of the larger group gets the advantage of being able to seek and receive Assistance from her partners.

## Crowd Control 

Characters can find themselves encountering large groups, and not just armies or enemy factions intent on killing them. Hab-slaves on their way to the pits, galley-dregs labouring in the depths of a cruiser, lost colonists who have forgotten the Imperium, even a xenos race staring in wonder at the alien players--all can be useful tools if turned to the Character's cause. Riots, rebellions, and regicides have happened throughout history and often it has been a few charismatic and opportunistic individuals that have sparked the flames of such "liberty." Learning to control and manipulate the mob is a useful ability to have, for a crowd that is hostile to the Characters is clearly more difficult to influence than an ambivalent one. The larger the crowd, however, the more intransigent it is. The GM can use a variant of the Social Conflict rules to indicate how successful the players are in swaying a crowd, but note that a crowd is a different entity to a rival group (which is covered earlier). A crowd is a more passive entity, although if angered, a mob can quickly turn violent against the Characters. Before the Characters can tackle the crowd, the Game Master must define it through two questions:

-   How large is the crowd?
-   What is the crowd's Disposition?

The size of the crowd determines its collective Willpower. The crowd's Disposition decides the Disposition modifier. See Tables Size of Crowd and Crowd Disposition to determine these levels. Once a crowd has been defined, the Characters can try and sway it to their cause. This is performed similarly to a Social Conflict, with some key differences. First, if a Compact is talking to a crowd, then the group must select a speaker. The speaker can receive Assistance from her fellow Characters as normal. The speaker must note down her Infamy reserve and Willpower as usual. She can attempt to Overawe the audience; to do this the GM assumes the crowd has Infamy equal to its Collective Willpower. A crowd successfully Overawed loses 1d10+10 Willpower instead of the usual d5. The speaker can now bid Infamy from her reserve. In the Verbal Contact stage the player performs her contribution. Unlike a normal Social Conflict, there is no direct opponent, the player is speaking to the crowd so must make a rousing or terrifying speech to affect the mob before her. The GM rates the contribution, and awards an appropriate modifier ranging from +20 for a good contribution to -20 for one that would not please the audience. The speaker must now take a Fellowship test (or a Skill-based test depending on how the player performed), bearing in mind the cumulative modifiers for the Crowd Disposition, Assistance, Talents, hecklers, supporters, and any award or penalty from the verbal contribution. If the test is passed, then the crowd loses d5 Willpower plus the amount equal to any bid Infamy. If the test is failed, then the Character must lose d5 Willpower, plus the amount equal to her bid Infamy. Note in a failed test, Infamy is not lost as normal but is used to sap the Character's own Willpower; this represents the Character becoming deflated and anxious as her attempts to rouse the audience fall on deaf ears. Rounds continue in this way until either the crowd or the Character has lost all Willpower. If the Character wins, then the crowd can be swayed. It is now willing to do a single simple task under the Character's direction, such as begin rioting or march upon their sovereign's palace, but is unable to take more complex direction such as executing an elaborate battle plan, as the Characters are dealing with a fragile group mentality. If the Character loses, then she suffers the normal penalties for failing in a Social Conflict and the crowd turns hostile; the group needs an exit strategy or must resort to more brutal methods to get what they want. If at any point the speaker rolls a natural 100, then the crowd immediately turns aggressive and sets about the Character and her comrades. Treat the crowd as a Horde attack of Magnitude equal to their current Willpower; hopefully, the Characters have prepared for such a contingency.

### Hecklers and Supporters 

An optional rule when swaying crowds is to allow for hecklers and supporters. To do this, note the Degrees of Success or Failure when making a Fellowship or Skill Test. Every Degree of Failure represents a heckler in the crowd, jeering the speaker, and counts as a -10 penalty in the following test in the next round only. Every Degree of Success represents a supporter, a member of the crowd that embraces the Characters' cause. Every supporter gives the player a +10 modifier in the following Fellowship or Skill test in the next round only.

### Size of Crowd
| Crowd Number | Collective Willpower | 
| --- | --- | 
| 0-10 | 10 | 
| 11-50 | 20 | 
| 51-100 | 30 | 
| 101-300 | 40 | 
| 301-1000 | 50 | 
| 1001-2000 | 60 | 
| 2001-5000 | 70 | 
| 5001-10,000 | 80 | 
| 10,001+ | 90 | 

### Crowd Disposition
| Crowd Descriptor | Difficulty Modifier | 
| --- | --- | 
| Accepting | Ordinary +10 | 
| Ambivalent | Challenging +0 | 
| Antagonistic | Difficult -10 | 
| Hostile | Hard -20 | 
