# Subtlety

Subtlety represents how secretive or overt the Acolytes are in their behaviour as they prosecute an investigation. Subtlety ranges from 0-100 and can be used as the basis for a test, just like a characteristic. Unlike characteristics, there is a single Subtlety value for the warband of Acolytes, which the GM tracks in secret, so that the players never know exactly what their Subtlety score is. The higher the Acolytes' Subtlety is, the less their enemies and potential allies know of their actions. The more their Subtlety decreases, the more transparent their actions become and the more others know. 

Inquisitors and their Acolytes take many different approaches to accomplish their duties, and a high Subtlety is not necessarily better. While many Inquisitors prefer to move unseen throughout the Imperium, the better to take their enemies by surprise, some operate openly, trusting in the populace's fear of the Inquisition to smoke out the heretics amongst them. High and low Subtlety both have benefits and drawbacks, depending on the situation and the Acolytes' methods.

## Tracking Subtlety

Each warband begins with a Subtlety of 50. During the game, the Acolytes' actions serve to increase and decrease the group's Subtlety. The more obvious and direct they are, the lower their Subtlety, while the more cautious and secretive, the higher the value. Subtlety is likely to change throughout the course of an investigation in response to the Acolytes' decisions and the vicissitudes of fate. Table: The Subtlety Track provides examples of the behaviour of a group at different Subtlety values.

### The Subtlety Track

| Subtlety | Example | 
|---|---|
| 01–10 | The Acolytes wear ostentatious armour and outfits, emblazoned with icons of the Inquisition, and a trio of tiny, winged servitors trumpet the group’s every entrance. The warband accomplishes most tasks by giving direct orders to others in the name of the Inquisition, loudly threatening any who would dare oppose them. |
| 11–20 | The Acolytes rely on their reputations to accomplish their goals, openly wearing symbols of their affiliations and loyalties. When questioning suspects or the general populace, the Acolytes are blunt and direct, and ready to respond with violence should anyone attempt to flee or deceive them. |
| 21–30 | When dealing with a suspected cultist, the Acolytes openly attack with the goal of subduing him for later interrogation. |
| 31–40 | While refraining from invoking the name of the Inquisition, the Acolytes nonetheless favour the direct approach, and respond to violence in kind. The heavy weaponry they tote draws some attention, particularly from the local Enforcers. |
| 41–50 | The Acolytes take no great pains to hide their weapons and armour, nor to conceal their business. However, neither do they draw extra attention to themselves or announce their true allegiance. |
| 51–60 | When dealing with a suspected cultist, the Acolytes trail him, observing his behaviour from afar and asking around amongst his acquaintances. |
| 61–70 | The Acolytes go to great lengths to keep their presence unknown to their enemies, and to avoid drawing the attention of local authorities. They do their best to avoid violent engagements, even involving the lower ranks of the heretics’ organization. |
| 71–80 | The Acolytes go undercover to conduct the investigation. Even before their arrival in-system, the Acolytes operate under thoroughly detailed false identities in order to infiltrate the heretics’ ranks and bring them down from within. |
| 81–90 | Surprise is amongst the Acolytes’ primary weapons. They operate with great stealth, concealing their presence or identity until it is time to strike. |
| 91–100 | The Acolytes are neither seen nor heard, or are so perfect in their disguises that none suspect their true nature. |

## Effects of Subtlety

Subtlety is a crucial concern for Acolytes who serve an Inquisitor, with a number of far-reaching effects, yet neither a low or high value is necessarily "better," as both can be beneficial under different circumstances. Whether low or high, Subtlety mainly affects the game in two ways. First, Subtlety impacts the game narratively, affecting the reactions of NPCs, shaping what resources the Acolytes can access, and determining how much their enemies and allies know of their activities. Second, the group's Subtlety can modify certain tests, either lowering or raising the difficulty based on its current value and the purpose of the test in question. Some tasks are more easily accomplished if the Acolytes are unknown or effectively disguised, while others benefit from a general awareness of the Acolytes' activities.

### Narrative Effects

The transparency or secrecy of the Acolytes' behaviour can have any number of effects on the narrative of a game. A group that acts too openly could betray their presence to the cult for which they are searching, allowing the heretics plentiful time to flee or prepare an ambush. Conversely, if the Acolytes are too subtle in their investigation, when the time comes, they could have extreme difficulty convincing local authorities of the seriousness of the threat or even the true power the Acolytes represent.

When an encounter arises that depends significantly on how overt or subtle the Acolytes are, the GM makes a Subtlety test using the group's current value. If the test succeeds, the Acolytes are considered subtle for the purposes of the event or encounter, remaining hidden from the cult or unknown to the Enforcers, for instance. If the test fails, the Acolytes are overt; their actions are revealed to a cult, taverns begin to buzz about odd strangers in the area, or their reputation becomes known to local Enforcers.

Depending on the potential consequences for the narrative, the GM can roll the Subtlety test when the Acolytes take a particular action, or only once the results become evident. For instance, if the Acolytes are attempting to disguise themselves as off-world scholars in order to investigate a guild suspected of trading in proscribed texts, the GM could roll a Subtlety test when they introduce themselves, in order to determine if the guilders have heard rumours of an Inquisitor's Acolytes in the area, or of unknown persons investigating their operations. The guilders might offer a round of vintage amasec to the Acolytes - but if the Subtlety test had failed, the amasec is perhaps laced with a poison, or they have alerted their henchmen to intercept the Acolytes.

When to make a Subtlety test ultimately comes down to the GM's preference and instinct. As with other tests, a Subtlety test is only necessary if the outcome has an impact on the story. Through its effects on the narrative, Subtlety can provide great opportunities for roleplaying. If they are openly operating as Acolytes of an Inquisitor, even powerful and influential individuals are likely to show the utmost respect and deference (at least to their faces), while these same NPCs may respond to the Acolytes with disdain or outright contempt if their authority is unknown. Even in the case of an NPC offering the same services or information regardless of the Acolytes' Subtlety, the nature of their interaction may be very different. A barkeep serves drinks to the Acolytes and offers the latest gossip in either case, but if the warband is subtle, he may water down the drinks and make jests at the Acolytes' expense. If he knows who they are, however, he might behave in an overly obsequious manner while serving the best amasec in the house and refusing to accept payment, clearly revealing that what might have been a carefully crafted disguise is all for naught. The Acolytes can then either try to continue with the charade, or utilise their reputation to their advantage.

### Subtlety Test Modifiers

Often, the success of an Acolyte's actions depends on how secretive or overt the group has been earlier. Infiltrating the local underworld can be much more difficult if everyone is watching over their shoulders for signs of the Inquisition. When an Acolyte attempts a test and the outcome depends on how well-known the group is, the GM can choose to have the group's Subtlety modify the test. To do so, the GM first decides if the action the Acolyte is attempting benefits from overtness or from subtleness. 

The following examples demonstrate tasks that benefit from subtlety and from overtness:
Examples of tasks benefitted by Subtlety:
* Employing the Disguise use of the Deceive skill to conceal an Acolyte's identity.
* Using the Inquiry skill to ask around in the criminal underworld, or questioning other untrusting individuals.
* Applying the Shadowing use of the Stealth skill to covertly follow a suspected cultist.
* Exercising the Tracking use of the Survival skill to locate a suspected killer.

Examples of tasks benefitted by Overtness:

* Using the Charm skill to impress an Adeptus Arbites Judge.
* Employing the Terrify use of the Command skill to stop a squad of Enforcers running from a xenos monstrosity.
* Applying the Inquiry skill on Emperor-fearing citizens.
* Exercising the Interrogation skill to pry information from a recalcitrant cultist.

The GM then rolls a test using the group's Subtlety. If the Subtlety test is successful, the Acolyte gains a +20 bonus to tests relevant to a task that benefits from subtlety, or a -20 penalty if the task benefits from overtness. Conversely, if the Subtlety test is failed, the Acolyte suffers a -20 penalty if the task benefits from subtlety, but a +20 bonus if the test benefits from overtness. Depending on the circumstances and nature of the task at hand, this modifier could apply to a single roll, or to a series of tests using different skills.

Of course, not every test should be affected by Subtlety. Before making a Subtlety test in order to modify an Acolyte's skill use, the GM should consider if the target NPC could possibly be aware of the Acolytes, and if so, if it makes a significant difference. When used appropriately, this effect of Subtlety significantly reinforces the importance of the Acolytes' choices. It reminds players that each of their actions has consequences, and that the world responds to the decisions they make.

## Conjunction Of Subtlety And Influence

In many ways, Subtlety and Influence are connected. While Influence represents, in part, how well-known each individual Acolyte’s career and achievements are on a sector-wide level, Subtlety represents knowledge of the group’s current activities and whereabouts on a local level. Generally, the effects of Subtlety are short-term, while Influence is long-lasting and more permanent. Influence changes more slowly and infrequently, with major changes happening over time, whereas Subtlety can fluctuate quite a bit within a relatively short period. Influence and Subtlety have different effects on the game and usually come into play in different situations. However, sometimes both Subtlety and Influence can be relevant to a single test or encounter. Similarly, there are ways in which Subtlety can affect Influence and vice versa. It is up to the GM to determine when Subtlety and Influence are both relevant, or when one impacts the other. 

### Subtlety And Change In Influence

Oftentimes, events that result in an increase or loss of Influence for an Acolyte occur in the midst of an investigation or assignment. An Acolyte can perform an impressive and monumental feat, but the boost to his reputation could be much less if only his closest companions know of it. Conversely, even an abysmal failure could do little to affect an Acolyte’s reputation if no one can link him to the incident. When an Acolyte stands to gain or lose Influence, the GM can decide that the warband’s current Subtlety has the potential to mitigate the change. If so, he makes a Subtlety test against the warband’s current Subtlety. If the test succeeds, the GM reduces the amount of Influence gained or lost by 1 for every 2 degrees of success. A warband’s Subtlety is temporary in comparison to an Acolyte’s Influence; if the nature of the event is such that the Acolyte can be easily connected to it after the fact, the warband’s current Subtlety should not have an impact.

### Subtlety And Influence Tests

Effective use of Influence requires an Acolyte to use his name and reputation. While it is possible to use Influence while remaining incognito, such as by dropping names or making vague threats, it is often more difficult. Similarly, if an Acolyte has been acting subtly, others may not believe him when he finally does reveal his true identity. When an Acolyte attempts to use his Influence whilst engaged in an investigation, the GM should determine if the group’s Subtlety has any bearing on the attempt. If so, then the GM can make a Subtlety test to determine the modifier to the Acolyte’s Influence test, just as for any other test the outcome of which depends on Subtlety

## Gaining Subtlety

As already stated, a group's Subtlety is not fixed, and changes based on the Acolytes' actions. Unlike characteristics, Subtlety often fluctuates, and usually changes numerous times during the course of an adventure in response to the players' decisions and the course of action taken by the Acolytes. The Acolytes increase their Subtlety by acting in a manner that conceals their presence or misdirects their foes. By using stealth, guile, and generally maintaining a low profile, the Acolytes can ensure a high Subtlety value, and the effects - both beneficial and detrimental - that entails.

When the Acolytes gain Subtlety is at the GM's discretion. Any time an Acolyte acts to conceal his presence or to provide misinformation about the group and its plans, the GM can choose to increase the group's Subtlety. While Acolytes sometimes act with the specific intent of increasing their Subtlety, it can also occur as a side effect of their actions. When deciding how to go about a task, the Acolytes must consider the potential ramifications for future encounters; concealing their presence and identities could prevent the local authorities from interfering with an investigation, but those same authorities might not believe the Acolytes' story if they catch them breaking into a corrupt noble's manse. There are many ways that a group's Subtlety might increase, such as the following examples:

* **Deception:** Lies, disguises, and false identities can help to conceal the Acolytes' presence and wrong-foot their enemies. All too often, the Acolytes have little or no knowledge of their true opponents when beginning an investigation, and can gain an advantage by ensuring their enemies are no better off. As all Inquisitors know, information is power. When an Acolyte successfully accomplishes an act of deception, the GM may raise the group's Subtlety. The amount gained depends on the scale of the deception and who it is being deceived. If the target of the deception is crucial to the investigation, the group's Subtlety could increase quite a bit. If, on the other hand, the target is only tangentially related to the main thrust of the action, the effect should be fairly minimal. The GM may also wish to consider the personality and reputation of the NPC involved. If the person has a reputation for outrageous exaggerations and falsehoods, perhaps no one believes him when he starts ranting about Acolytes of the Inquisition visiting him.
* **Stealth and Subterfuge:** Perhaps the best way to keep a low profile is to simply never be seen. When an Acolyte completes a relevant task while avoiding notice, the group's Subtlety could increase. Similarly, an action taken with the express purpose of concealing their presence also might increase it. As the Acolytes cover their tracks and generally act in such a way as to hide their activities, they can avoid tipping of their enemies. Setting up a base of operations in a forlorn and abandoned hab instead of a well-known inn, going about their business while wearing disguises, and even using psychic powers to conceal their presence from the minds of others are all possible ways Acolytes could increase their Subtlety.

While the Acolytes' actions play a strong part in determining their Subtlety, any number of factors beyond their control can also contribute, such as the methods of communication available to their enemies and allies, or the tendency for the local citizenry to gossip. When the group's Subtlety increases, it does so by a random amount, which the GM determines in secret. Recall also that the GM secretly tracks Subtlety, and the value is always hidden from the players. Consequently, though the players know their Subtlety at the beginning of the game, as soon as events start to modify it, they can never be sure of the exact value. 

When the GM decides that something has occurred to raise the Acolytes' Subtlety, it usually increases by 1d5. For major accomplishments or pivotal events, however, the Acolytes may gain 1d10 Subtlety. In either case, the GM can add positive or negative modifiers to these rolls based on the circumstances and the actions of the Acolytes. For instance, an Acolyte securing lodgings for the group under a false name might gain 1d5-2 Subtlety, while conducting business under an assumed identity complete with a detailed cover story, thorough disguise, and carefully falsified documents might increase the group's Subtlety by 1d10+1

## Losing Subtlety

Just as the Acolytes' actions can increase Subtlety, so can they reduce it. When the Acolytes act in a way that reveals their presence or intentions, the GM can reduce Subtlety in much the same way that he raises it for their covert actions. It is difficult to maintain high Subtlety if the Acolytes conduct their investigation using direct confrontation, excessive requisitions, brandishing grandiose weaponry and armour, relying on their reputations and authority, and generally broadcasting their presence. Such tactics may be effective in the short term, but the Acolytes must be wary that they do not hinder their ultimate goals. When the Acolytes' behaviour calls attention to their presence, activities, or plans, the GM secretly lowers their Subtlety value by a random amount appropriate to the situation. The following examples illustrate some of the common actions that decrease Subtlety:

* **Exercising Authority:** From the most primitive feral world to the most populous hive city, word of an Inquisitorial presence spreads swiftly. If the Acolytes use their connections to the Inquisition to open doors, loosen tongues, or detain suspects, it can quickly reveal their presence to the populace and their enemies, even if such uses of power were made in private. The amount of Subtlety lost due to exercising authority is affected by the trustworthiness and discretion of the people they reveal themselves to, as well as how public are the circumstances of the revealing event.
* **Intimidation:** Whether threatening the wrath of the Emperor or just a bloody lip, intimidation tends to get an Acolyte noticed, whether or not the target knows who the Acolyte really is. The amount of Subtlety lost due to intimidation depends on factors such as the severity of the threat, the importance and reputation of the threatened party, and whether the Acolyte follows through, as well as anything else the GM deems relevant.
* **Combat:** Any time the characters engage in conflict, their Subtlety may be reduced. Even if the Acolytes leave no direct witnesses and cannot be tied to the fight, dead bodies and collateral damage lead to people talking, which makes it more difficult to lay low. Again, this holds true whether the locals view the Acolytes as representatives of the Inquisition or merely as no-good outsiders. The amount by which the Acolytes' Subtlety is reduced depends on the scale of the conflict, as well as how likely any witnesses are to talk. The types of weapons the Acolytes use and their appropriateness to the environment might also contribute. A shoot-out with laspistols and stubbers in the underhive is unremarkable, but one with graviton guns and force swords is not When the Acolytes lose Subtlety, the amount lost is random, just as with increases to Subtlety. 
 
Depending on the importance and scope of the action, the Acolytes' Subtlety can decrease by either 1d5 or 1d10, modified at the GM's discretion. As the Acolytes engage in secretive and overt actions, their Subtlety fluctuates. Small steps taken to hide their presence can be undone when a fight breaks out. A warband loudly arriving in the name of the Inquisition, then soon fading into the shadows, might cause their enemies to wrongly believe the Acolytes have given up and moved on. Consequently, Subtlety is fluid and, to an extent, self-determining. As Acolytes operate overtly, it becomes more difficult for them to conceal future actions. Likewise, a group that has thus far behaved furtively or deceptively might have trouble getting noticed, even if they want to.

## Determining Subtlety

One element that distinguishes Subtlety from the other characteristics and resources at the players' disposal is the fact that, once events have modified the group's starting Subtlety, they are not aware of its exact value. Players are usually aware when their Subtlety changes, and if it increases or decreases, but they do not know by what amount. In some cases, however, the GM can modify the warband's Subtlety without the players even realising it - for instance, if the Acolytes were unaware that an enemy had intercepted their vox transmissions. As events further modify their Subtlety, it becomes more and more difficult for the players to guess its current value. This reflects the uncertain nature of undercover or otherwise covert investigations, and it helps to reinforce an air of mystery and paranoia.

However, while the Acolytes cannot be certain of exactly how well-known their presence is to enemies and potential allies, this information is nonetheless an important factor in many decisions. For instance, if the Acolytes are deciding whether to approach a cult's hideout stealthily or in force, it helps to know that the cult is expecting intruders and has heightened security. Acolytes can get a rough idea of how successful their efforts at going undetected have been by asking around, observing the populace, or monitoring enemy communications. In game terms, by taking actions such as these, players can obtain limited information from the GM regarding the group's current Subtlety.

### Making The Attempt

When attempting to determine their current Subtlety, the players must first decide what exactly the Acolytes are trying to discover, and how they are going about it. For instance, the Acolytes might wish to determine whether locals are gossiping about the new outsiders, or whether a crime lord knows that several of his lieutenants are recently amongst the dead after a shootout. Based on the Acolytes' planned actions, the GM decides on an appropriate skill test to determine the outcome. There are numerous ways the Acolytes can attempt to discover their Subtlety, but likely skills include Awareness or Inquiry. The following are examples of common methods Acolytes can employ in an attempt to discover their warband's Subtlety:

* **Asking Around:** Often, the best way to determine how well known the group's activities are is to simply ask around. Acolytes must walk a fine line when pursuing such a course of action, however. If they are not careful, they could inadvertently draw attention to themselves through their questions; individuals whom the Acolytes question may have their curiosity piqued and begin making inquiries of their own. For this reason, Acolytes must keep their questions vague or general. This precaution, however, runs the risk of dredging up inaccurate information. This approach relies primarily on use of the Inquiry skill. 
* **Observation:** Acolytes can attempt to determine their Subtlety by observing others. This could range from making general examinations of the populace and eavesdropping on conversations, to trailing a suspected heretic to see if his behaviour gives anything away. This strategy poses less risk of backfiring, as the Acolytes do not become directly involved. By the same token, if the Acolytes select the wrong persons or locations to examine, they may find themselves spending a great deal of time with little payoff. This approach commonly calls for Awareness tests.
* **Inspection:** Particularly on more advanced worlds, Acolytes can discern a good deal of information about the relative covertness of their activities by inspecting records and data. This approach covers everything from remotely infiltrating a data-net to examining records at the local Administratum officio. Accessing or understanding such information usually requires specialised skills and knowledge, for the Acolytes must often bypass security measures or decrypt coded information. As such, it calls on an eclectic group of skills such as Tech-Use, Security, or Linguistics.

Attempts to determine Subtlety are not to be undertaken lightly. They require the Acolytes to distil information from a number of sources, which generally takes a considerable amount of time. Exactly how long it takes is at the GM's discretion, but should generally be the better part of a day, or longer. Additionally, the Acolytes must proceed cautiously, lest their efforts to verify the success of their covert attempts actually backfire and tip of their enemies to the warband's presence. Under many circumstances, Acolytes can choose to spend extra time on the attempt, or alternatively to complete it in less than the amount of time the GM states. Taking additional time on the attempt provides a bonus to the skill test, while rushing the attempt provides a penalty.

Unless the GM determines otherwise, only a single Acolyte makes the skill test to determine Subtlety, although he can benefit from assistance from other Acolytes if circumstances warrant. Having too many Acolytes working to determine Subtlety can be counter-productive, making it impossible to get an accurate picture as the various efforts create a sort of "echo chamber" in which the Acolytes own inquiries get back around to them, giving a false impression that others are asking around regarding the Acolytes. As a rough guideline, Acolytes can attempt to determine their Subtlety in as little as half of the time that the GM quotes, but with a -30 penalty to relevant tests, while spending twice as long grants a +20 bonus. Normally, the Acolytes make a single skill test when attempting to determine Subtlety. Depending on the circumstances and the Acolytes' plan, however, the GM can require multiple skill tests, perhaps by different Acolytes. Additionally, the attempt might take place through several encounters. 

For instance, if the Acolytes decide to examine the records at the local Sanctionary precinct to see what the local authorities know about the Acolytes' activities, they must first gain access to the records without being caught, which would defeat the purpose. This could include multiple encounters, as the Acolytes break into the precinct house, search for the proper documents, avoid a patrol, and attempt to escape undetected. In this way, determining Subtlety can become the focus for a night's play and make for an exciting adventure in its own right.

The Game Master secretly rolls skill tests to determine Subtlety, so that the players do not know the result. If the skill test is successful, the GM describes the results, narratively providing the players with some idea of their Subtlety. In addition, the GM reveals the group's current Subtlety bonus (the first digit of their Subtlety score)

### The Risks Of Failure

If the skill test fails, the GM still provides a narrative description of the results. If the test fails with less than two degrees, the GM can, at his discretion, declare that the Acolytes' attempts are simply inconclusive. However, if the test results in two or more degrees of failure, the Acolytes' attempts garner misleading results, and the GM provides an inaccurate number for the group's Subtlety bonus. Just how misleading the results are depends on the number of degrees of failure and the specifics of the situation. 

The number that the GM provides to the Acolytes is different from their actual Subtlety bonus by an amount equal to the degrees of failure scored on the test. The GM decides if the false result is higher or lower than the Acolytes' actual Subtlety bonus, corresponding to the narrative description he provides. There are many potential outcomes depending on what method the Acolytes used. Table: Subtlety Determination Examples provides some examples based on the result of the test and the circumstances. The GM should describe the results of a failed attempt in the same manner as a successful attempt, so that the players do not become suspicious. This lack of certainty for the players adds an exciting degree of tension to the game, and can make for some very dramatic turns if the Acolytes proceed based on a misunderstanding of the situation.

### Subtlety Determination

| Skill Test | Skill Test Result | | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| *The Acolytes are trying to…* | *3 Degrees of Failure:* | *1 Degree of Failure:* | *1 Degree of Success:* | *3 Degrees of Success:* |
| Monitor suspected cultists of the Amethyst Hand to determine if the cult realises it is under investigation. (Awareness test) | The Acolyte accidentally tails the wrong person. The players (wrongly) believe that the cult is unaware of them, and so are not prepared for the next day’s attack. | The Acolyte ends his attempted surveillance prematurely, incorrectly determining that he is about to be discovered or even attacked. | The Acolyte tails the cultist to a meeting of the Amethyst Hand and learns that the cult is indeed aware that someone is investigating them. The Subtlety bonus is 2. | Additionally, the Acolyte overhears the cultists making plans to preemptively strike against the Acolytes. |
| Ask around the local taverns and markets to check if anyone is aware of their presence. (Inquiry test) | The GM tells the players that their Subtlety bonus is 1 (when it is really 4); the Acolytes believe that their activities are well-known, causing them to act hastily and recklessly. | After a day, the Acolytes are no wiser. Unfortunately, their reputation as generous spenders and drinkers spreads, decreasing their Subtlety. | Spending a day prowling the local taverns, the Acolytes determine that their presence is mostly unknown. Their current Subtlety bonus is 4. | The Acolytes also discover the name of a certain person who is looking for them — a new potential lead. |
